Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
Poole Anderson is one of a small group of science fiction authors who have written
future histories.
A future history is a group of stories or novels written along a consistent timeline
in the future.
Characters may or may not recur, but the intention is to speculate on the evolution of human
society beyond the present day.
Anderson actually has written two future histories.
The first is not as best known, and it consists of only a dozen or so stories.
Anderson began it in the late 1940s.
But I started out originally rather early in my career and more or less inspired by
the timeline's future history, and constructed one of my own with charts and background material
and so on, like his.
Of course mine was in mind, the events were different.
But basically I wanted to do a similar job that is fictionally tell about the story of
mankind from almost the present day up at least until the early year of expansion among
the stars.
This wasn't going to be the only thing I did by any means, or would write other things
that were not in the series, but from time to time I'd add something to it, and I did
over the years.
Some of the stories in this future history are Wolf, Quixote in the Windmill, Cold Victory,
and the Snows of Ganymede.
The earliest stories in the series describe World War III, which Anderson had said in
1958, a war that destroys modern civilization.
But out of the war decades later rose a new civilization.
It was a repressive one, dominated by the Psycho-Technic Institute, an organization
which strictly plans and controls human progress through psychological manipulation.
Anderson carefully traces out the social, political, and technological events which
shaped the new society.
He describes the colonization of Venus and Mars, for instance, the development of robotics
and artificial regeneration, and the struggle toward a true world government.
In one story, the troublemakers, he sends a space ark off to Alpha Centauri in a voyage
that will take 123 years.
But overall, things don't go smoothly.
Anderson envisions society undergoing many upheavals.
In Quixote in the Windmill, for instance, there are violent anti-robot riots, and in
Cold Victory, a humanist revolution occurs which overthrows a psychotechnic institute.
But some of the institute's people escape to Ganymede, the largest of Jupiter's moons,
where they continue fighting.
It isn't until the story break, the last one in this particular future history, that the
institute is totally wiped out.
At this point, around the 23rd century, the human race is ready to attempt interstellar
colonization.
Anderson leaves it there at the beginning of a new era.
He explains why he added no more to it.
But gradually, for a number of reasons, got less and less interested in continuing and
started phasing it out, doing less and less of it.
One reason for being less interested was that, as for the early part of it, reality was catching
up with me.
Anderson's second future history is much larger and better known.
It includes some of the most memorable characters he's created, like Nicholas von Rhein and Dominic
Flandry.
We'll talk with Anderson about that series next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Poole Anderson has written one of the most ambitious and extensive future histories in
science fiction.
It's usually called the Future History of the Polysoteknic League, although a better term
might be the League and Empire series.
We asked Anderson how the future history got its start.
Now that has a history much more like that of Topsy.
It just grew.
Originally I'd written a few stories about Nicholas von Rhein and I'd written a few stories
about Dominic Flandry, who lived in completely different miliars, of course.
And then one day on an impulse, I thought, well gosh, they could be on the same timeline,
one living about 500 years after the other.
And through an invention of that in one of the, once, one of the Flandry stories, and
then started fitting in other stories wherever it was convenient.
You see, the thing with the future history is that although each story should, of course,
be readable independently of any others and comprehensible and so on, nevertheless,
if you have a reader who remembers a number of them, the cross connections will add an
extra dimension and thereby a hope at his enjoyment.
So I started doing it that way.
And after a while realized I had a rather large beast by the tail.
If I was going to stay consistent at all, then I had to keep careful notes and I had to develop
a systematic scheme and so on.
And thus over the years one thing led to another until it all became rather elaborate by now
and what includes, I think, something like 40 separate items of which probably at least
a third or so are full dressed novels.
The first story Nicholas Von Ryn turned up in was the novel The Man Who Counts,
which was also issued as The War of the Wingman.
Von Ryn is a nonheroic type.
He's a fat, loudmouthed, cursing schemer who favors good food, drink and creature comforts.
But using his wits he usually conquers all of his foes, human or alien.
He establishes the Polysotectonic League, a trading guild which carries Earth culture throughout the stars.
We asked Anderson if Von Ryn has been popular with readers.
Oh yes, there are some readers who can't stand him but they don't ignore him either.
And as for the rest, he probably is the most popular character I've ever come up with.
Then about 500 years along the timeline of his future history,
Anderson introduces Dominic Flandry, an agent for the Terran Empire.
He turns up in books like Instant Flandry, The Rebel Worlds, Earthman Go Home,
and A Night of Ghosts and Shadows.
The Flandry stories are set in the 31st century and involve the Terran Empire's
struggle with its powerful alien antagonist, the Merseans.
Flandry is the opposite of Von Ryn.
He's smooth, sophisticated, suave, a man who can either fight or scheme with equal style and flair.
He reminds a reader of James Bond.
We asked Anderson if the relationship was intentional.
Oh no, no I've been asked this before and as a matter of fact the first Flandry story
appeared something like 20 years before the first James Bond story did.
If I was modeling on any other character at all, it would probably have had to be somebody like the scene.
Anderson says he probably won't be adding any more to the future history of the Polysotectic League and the Terran Empire,
but there's enough material there already to keep a science fiction reader busy for a long time.
We'll have some more on Pool Anderson next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Cruz.
A number of science fiction authors employ the technique of world building in their stories.
Pool Anderson is one of the best at world building. He explains the term.
The term simply refers to the construction of an imaginary world as a setting for a story in considerable detail.
Now, lots of people have done this.
This is an obvious example, for example, of what would be J.R.R. Tolkien in The Lord of the Rings and related stories.
He constructs an imaginary world in vast detail, complete down to fine points of the various languages spoken and so on.
Anderson's first extensive attempt at world building was the Planet Diomedes, which was a setting for his novel The Man Who Counts.
He meticulously constructs the planet in detail that allows winged intelligent beings.
The atmosphere, for example, is very heavy, which is necessary to support a large flying creature.
Anderson explains why he spends so much time constructing his planets in consistent and careful detail.
After all, we really cannot reasonably expect that any other planet anywhere in the universe will be very much like Earth.
We'll probably be lucky if we find a few where humans can live without artificial help.
And you're certainly not going to have native humans around there, or oak trees, or rabbits, or any other feature that we know here on Earth.
That's just preposterous, I suppose, on the basis of everything we know about the evolution of life here on Earth.
So, in that case, let's try to set up some of the features which are different.
After all, one reason people read science fiction is precisely that they like to get away from the world around them once in a while and escape into something exotic.
And in my opinion, to the extent that this exotic thing can be made at the same time realistic and convincing, the reader is getting his money's worth.
Almost any world constructed by Anderson in his science fiction stories is put together with attention given to basic scientific laws.
Anderson, after all, was a physics student in college and knows his science.
Other authors, Hal Clement and Larry Niven, come to mind.
Practice careful world-building, too.
In fact, Clement says his science fiction novel challenges its readers to find any scientific errors committed by the author.
Clement calls this The Game. Anderson elaborates on it.
The game consists in an author setting up a world or a situation or something as the very best he can and writing a story about it.
And then that's all he can do. He's made his move and that's it.
And readers are free to thereafter to try to figure out from the story exactly what he had in mind and exactly where he may have gone wrong.
So I've gotten some very interesting mail on technical points.
And yes, sometimes they have indicated to me that I've goofed on this or that detail, but alright.
I'm wondering from that, I don't mind.
With Anderson and with other world builders, a reader gets a bonus to accompany an exciting narrative.
Interesting and accurate science.
More with Poole Anderson in our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz.
And Daryl Lane.
Poole Anderson is noted both as a master world builder and as a creator of believable aliens.
He matches aliens to their planets with meticulous and loving care and with great concern for scientific accuracy.
One of the best examples of his talents in this area is the race of winged creatures included in his future history of the Polysotechnic League.
Actually, he constructed two separate races of winged beings, the Diomedians from the Nicholas Von Rhein novel The Man Who Counts and the Ythrians of the planet Avalon.
Anderson explains how he got interested in intelligent beings with the ability to fly.
All the way back when, many years ago, I mean many years ago, it's about 40 by now,
Al Sprague the camp had published an article on intelligent non-human beings,
where he used basic physical principles to demolish a number of notions, you know, like the idea of a giant insect and so on.
It's just impossible.
It would collapse under its own weight because it hasn't got the structure to support that weight.
Things like that.
And one thing he doubted was that you could have an intelligent being which flies because the wing loading that a living flyer can absorb is a take.
It's so small that there just wouldn't be room for a sizable brain.
Anderson thought about the camp's arguments and at last came to at least a partial solution.
Well, science fiction writers tend to take this sort of a thing as a challenge.
And so when I wrote The Man Who Counts quite a while ago, I did have winged intelligent beings,
but I designed a planet such that it had a very dense atmosphere, which of course would make it easier to get about in the air.
I also made them essentially six-limbed so that they could have not only wings but legs and hands.
Well, afterward I got to thinking that had been kind of a cop-out. Couldn't there be some way to do it better?
Could it conceivably be done on an earth-like planet? I couldn't see any way.
The camp's arguments were there and they made sense.
At this point, the famous science fiction editor, John W. Campbell, came to the rescue.
Well, when it happened, the very last time I saw the late John W. Campbell,
I was in New York and visited his office and we went out to lunch together.
This was not long before his death. And we sat there talking.
And during a conversation, Anderson brought up the problem of constructing a large intelligent creature who could fly.
Campbell suggested a way to do it.
And he immediately said, well, suppose it had some sort of light-driven supercharging bellows that would give a tremendous cursive ability.
And I immediately saw that this was a way to power a winged animal, give it sufficient energy that it actually could fly in an atmosphere like our own.
Although it might weigh as much as 100 tons.
So on this hint, Anderson created the Ithrians of the planet Avalon.
The people of the wind is probably the best known of his novels involving the Ithrians,
but Anderson used them in a number of stories in his Polyceo-Technique League Future History.
Next time, we'll have more with Poole Anderson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
Stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Cruz.
One of the present masters of science fiction and fantasy, an author whose work stretches back four decades into the golden age of science fiction, is Poole Anderson.
It's hard to type Anderson. He's a full-time professional who writes all kinds of fantasy and science fiction.
He's known as a writer of hard science, for example, which can be seen in novels like Tau Zero or The Man Who Counts, a fine example of world building.
He's constructed two future histories. The best known one, the history of the Polysotectic League, contains some of his most famous characters and some of his most fascinating alien cultures.
Some of the best of contemporary fantasy comes from his pen also, in novels like The Broken Sword and Three Hearts and Three Lions.
And he sometimes writes tongue-in-cheek spooks, as in his novel The High Crusade, in which the medieval warriors with swords conquer a space-faring galactic civilization.
Anderson has won numerous Nebula and Hugo awards for his fiction, and he served as president of the science fiction writers of America. He knows the field like few others do.
We asked him if science fiction has changed in the years he's been writing it.
Oh, yes, I've been a great many changes back around 1940 or so. Well, practically all you could get, unless you heart back to a few writers like Wells and Verne, practically all you could get was in a few pop magazines.
And that means nowadays, of course, there's an overwhelming flood of it. It is not possible to read all which appears.
Anderson thinks the image of science fiction has changed over the years.
And also, of course, it's no longer disreputable. It's become quite respectable.
You know, when I was your age, it was unthinkable that anybody could arrange a telephone interview with one of the writers of it under the auspices of a college for heaven's sake.
But Lord, this was pop fiction. It was beyond the pale. Nowadays, it's been taught in college courses and all, you know, all this other stuff, you know.
He believes that science fiction has had an important impact on the public, and he tells us why he thinks science fiction is valuable.
Actually, all this is kind of trivial. I think the important thing is that the basic concepts have sort of permeated the public mind.
And I think people are aware in that nowadays, in a way that they never used to be aware, that the future is going to be different from the past.
It may be better, it may be worse, whatever, but it's going to be different and in very fundamental ways.
And they tend to accept this, be prepared for it.
I often say that perhaps the most important public service that science fiction is doing is by casting a certain glamour over science and technology.
It recruits a lot of young people into these fields and heaven knows we need an awful lot of scientists and technologists.
Anderson is still going strong today. You'll find his latest work at any bookstore.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.